package Rinci::resmeta; # just to make PodWeaver happy

# DATE
# VERSION

1;
# ABSTRACT: Function/method result metadata

=head1 SPECIFICATION VERSION

 1.1


=head1 INTRODUCTION

This document describes metadata for function/method result. This specification
is part of L<Rinci>. Please do a read up on it first, if you have not already
done so.


=head1 SPECIFICATION

There are currently several properties being used:


=head2 Property: undo_data => ANY

(DEPRECATED) Explained in C<undo> feature section in L<Rinci::function>.


=head2 Property: perm_err => bool

Indicate that error is permanent (instead of temporary/transient). This is to
provide a feature like that found in SMTP/POP protocol, where 4xx codes indicate
transient errors and 5xx permanent ones.

=head2 Properties: func.* => ANY

These properties allow function to return extra stuffs. Usually done to avoid
breaking format of existing result (to maintain API compatibility). The
attributes after C<func.> is up to the respective function. An example is the
C<get_args_from_argv()> function in the L<Perinci::Sub::GetArgs::Argv> Perl
module. The function returns C<$args> but from v0.26 it also wants to give hints
about whether or not there are missing arguments. It can do this via
C<func.missing_arg> result metadata.

=head2 Properties: cmdline.*

Interpreted by L<Perinci::CmdLine>. See its documentation for more detail.


=head2 Property: logs => ARRAY OF HASH

Store log of events happening to this result, stored chronologically (older
first). Each log should be a hash which should have at least the following keys:
C<time> (Unix timestamp), C<type> (string).

Normally, the first element of the log will contain information about who
produced the result and where/when. It has the C<type> key with the value of
C<create>. It should be a hash with the following keys:

=over

=item * package => STR

Package (namespace) where this result is produced.

=item * file => STR

File name where the result is created. Might be a relative or absolute path.

=item * line => INT

Line number where the result is created.

=item * func => STR

Function name where this result is produced.

=item * stack_trace => ARRAY

Optional, a stack trace. In Perl this can be produced by using << [caller(1),
caller(2), ...] >>.

=back

=head2 Property: prev => ARRAY

Store "previous result". Result MUST be enveloped. Usually useful when tracing
errors, especially in conjunction with C<logs>: when reporting error that
results from a call to another function, the original result can be set here, to
preserve information. See L<Perinci::Sub::Util>'s C<err()> for a convenience
function for this, and L<Perinci::CmdLine>'s way of displaying it.

Example:

 sub f1 {
     ...
     if (error) { return [500, "Can't f1: blah"] }
     ...
 }

 sub f2 {
     ...
     my $res = f1(...);
     if ($res is error) { return [500, "Can't f2", undef, {prev=>$res}] }
     ...
 }

 sub f3 {
     ...
     my $res = f1(...);
     if ($res is error) { return [500, "Can't f3", undef, {prev=>$res}] }
 }

=head2 Property: results => array

When a function returns an error response (in particular status 207, but other
statuses can also use this), it can put detailed errors here. For example, a
function which processed 5 items wanted to report that 2 items were successfully
processed but the rest 3 failed:

 [207, "Multistatus", undef, {
      results => [
          {status=>200, message=>"OK", item_id=>1},
          {status=>403, message=>"Forbidden", item_id=>2},
          {status=>404, message=>"Not found", item_id=>3},
          {status=>500, message=>"Failed", item_id=>4},
          {status=>200, message=>"OK", item_id=>5},
      ],
  }]

Each result is a hash to be able to store C<status>, C<message>, as well as
additional data like C<item_id> or whatever the function wants.

Another example, a function wants to give information on what arguments fail
validation:

 [400, "Some arguments fail validation", undef, {
      results => [
          {status=>400, arg=>"name", message=>"Missing"},
          {status=>400, arg=>"location/street", message=>"Missing"},
          {status=>400, arg=>"age", message=>"Must be numbers only"},
          {status=>400, arg=>"password", is_warning=>1,
           message=>"Should be longer than 4 characters"}, # warning only
      ],
 }]

=head1 FAQ


=head1 SEE ALSO

L<Rinci>

=cut
