package Rinci::Upgrading; # just to make PodWeaver happy

# VERSION

1;
# ABSTRACT: Upgrading from previous version of specification

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This document gives guide on how to convert your metadata from older version.

Examples are written in Perl, but are not limited to this language.


=head1 UPGRADING FROM SUB::SPEC 1.0 TO RINCI 1.1

=head2 Upgrading function metadata

Terminology change: B<(sub) spec> is now called metadata: reason is there are
now metadata for functions as well as other code entities like variables,
packages, etc. B<clause> is now called B<property>: reason is to avoid confusion
with L<Data::Sah>'s clause.

The C<v> (spec version) property is required, add

 v => 1.1

to your function metadata.

Each argument in the C<args> property is now a hash, instead of a schema. Move
the schema to the C<schema> key of the hash. To specify required argument, add
C<req> set to 1 to hash key. Move C<arg_pos> Sah clause to C<pos> hash key. Move
C<arg_greedy> Sah clause to C<greedy> hash key. Move C<arg_completion> Sah
clause to C<completion> hash key.

Example, change this:

 args => {
     # a required argument
     arg1 => ['int*', {
         summary => 'Blah ...',
         min => 1, max => 100,
         arg_pos => 0,
     }],

     # an optional argument
     arg2 => ['bool', {
         summary => 'Blah ...',
         default => 0,
     }],
 }

Into this:

 args => {
     arg1 => {
         summary => 'Blah ...',
         schema => ['int*', {min=>1, max=>100}],
         req => 1,
         pos => 0,
     },

     arg2 => {
         summary => 'Blah ...',
         schema => [bool => {default=>0}],
     },
 }

It is now possible to give summary and description to the schema as well as to
the argument.

Accordingly, the C<result> property is also now a hash, instead of schema. Move
the schema into the C<schema> hash key.

=head2 Sub::Spec::HTTP

Specification is now L<Rinci::HTTP>. Terminology changes. B<SS request> now
becomes B<Rinci request>. Some key names changed (shortened). Special headers
are now prefixed with B<X-Ri-*> instead of B<X-SS-*>.

Log level are now numeric only (1-6) instead of numeric/string.

=cut
